Docs for external MCP guardrails (#618)
agentgateway/website: content/docs/kubernetes/main/mcp/guardrails/setup.md

## Set up MCP guardrails

In this guide, you route `tools/call` and `tools/list` requests through a sample ExtMCP server that denies any tool whose name contains `forbidden` and annotates each tool description in `tools/list` responses.

{{% steps %}}

### Step 1: Deploy an MCP server {#mcp-server}

Deploy an MCP server for agentgateway to proxy traffic to. The following example sets up a simple MCP server with one tool, `fetch`, that retrieves the content of a website URL.

```yaml {paths="mcp-guardrails"}
kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: mcp-website-fetcher
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: mcp-website-fetcher
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: mcp-website-fetcher
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: mcp-website-fetcher
        image: ghcr.io/peterj/mcp-website-fetcher:main
        imagePullPolicy: Always
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: mcp-website-fetcher
  labels:
    app: mcp-website-fetcher
spec:
  selector:
    app: mcp-website-fetcher
  ports:
  - port: 80
    targetPort: 8000
    appProtocol: agentgateway.dev/mcp
EOF
```

> 

Reviewer: maybe add verification steps?

      backendRefs:
      - name: mcp-backend
        group: {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/group.md" >}}
        kind: {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/backend.md" >}}
EOF
```

### Step 5: Apply the guardrails policy

Create an {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} that attaches MCP guardrails to the {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/backend.md" >}}. The policy sends `tools/call` through the request phase and `tools/list` through the response phase. The `failureMode: FailClosed` setting denies requests if the policy server is unreachable.

```yaml {paths="mcp-guardrails"}
kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
apiVersion: {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/api-version.md" >}}
kind: {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}}
metadata:
  name: mcp-guardrails
spec:
  targetRefs:
    - group: {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/group.md" >}}
      kind: {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/backend.md" >}}
      name: mcp-backend
  backend:
    mcp:
      guardrails:
        processors:
        - remote:
            backendRef:
              name: ext-mcp
              port: 4445
            failureMode: FailClosed
          methods:
            tools/call: Request
            tools/list: Response

> EOF

Reviewer: can we add a description for this block 
```
methods:
            tools/call: Request
            tools/list: Response
```

it is a little hard to understand for me what this is actually doing

Author: added a table after the config

    jsonPath: "$.status.ancestors[0].conditions[?(@.type=='Accepted')].status"
    jsonPathExpectation:
      comparator: equals
      value: "True"
    polling:
      timeoutSeconds: 120
      intervalSeconds: 2
EOF
{{< /doc-test >}}

### Step 6: Optional: Set a timeout for the policy server {#timeout}

The guardrails callout has no deadline by default. If the policy server is slow or cold, the request can hang instead of letting `failureMode` engage. To bound the call, set a request timeout on the policy server with a `backend.http.requestTimeout` policy.

A backend policy that targets a `Service` only attaches once that Service is part of the dataplane config graph, which means it must be referenced by a route.

Create an HTTPRoute that references the `ext-mcp` Service so that the timeout policy attaches, then create the timeout policy.

```yaml
kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: ext-mcp-route
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: agentgateway-proxy
    namespace: {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
  hostnames:
    - "ext-mcp.internal"
  rules:
    - backendRefs:
      - name: ext-mcp
        port: 4445

> ---

Reviewer: it is a little hard to understand where this hostname is coming from and where this is used. also do you always create an httproute or only to apply the policy? because the policy does not seem to reference the httproute

Author: added more to the description, it is just to get the config...it is kind of a weird step anyways, more of a workaround...I moved it to a TS section, wdyt?

DENY=$(curl -s --max-time 10 "${HDRS[@]}" -H "mcp-session-id: $SID" "$MCP_ADDR" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":3,"method":"tools/call","params":{"name":"forbidden-tool","arguments":{}}}')
echo "$DENY" | grep -q 'is not allowed' || { echo "FAIL: forbidden tool was not denied: $DENY"; exit 1; }

# Request phase: the allowed "fetch" tool passes through and returns a result.
ALLOW=$(curl -s --max-time 15 "${HDRS[@]}" -H "mcp-session-id: $SID" "$MCP_ADDR" \
  -d '{"jsonrpc":"2.0","id":4,"method":"tools/call","params":{"name":"fetch","arguments":{"url":"https://example.com"}}}')
echo "$ALLOW" | grep -q '"result"' || { echo "FAIL: allowed tool did not return a result: $ALLOW"; exit 1; }

echo "PASS: MCP guardrails mutate, deny, and allow behaviors verified"
{{< /doc-test >}}

## Troubleshooting

### MCP requests hang when the policy server is slow or cold

**What's happening:**

A `tools/call` or `tools/list` request hangs instead of returning a result or an error.

**Why it's happening:**

The guardrails callout has no deadline by default. If the ExtMCP server is slow or its connection is cold, the request waits on the callout instead of letting `failureMode` engage.

**How to fix it:**

> Bound the call with a `backend.http.requestTimeout` policy on the ExtMCP server. When the timeout is reached, agentgateway applies the processor's `failureMode`: with `FailClosed`, the client receives a JSON-RPC error, and with `FailOpen`, the request proceeds without the guardrail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply a request timeout to the ExtMCP server. When the timeout is reached, agentgateway applies the processor's `failureMode` configuration. If `failureMode` is set to `FailClosed`, the client receives a JSON-RPC error. If the mode is set to `FailOpen`, the request proceeds without the guardrail.
```

> The timeout policy targets the `ext-mcp` Service. A backend policy that targets a `Service` attaches only after the Service becomes part of the proxy data plane configuration, which happens when a route references it. The HTTPRoute in the following example exists only to bring the `ext-mcp` Service into the data plane configuration so that the timeout policy attaches. The `ext-mcp.internal` hostname is a placeholder for the ExtMCP server. The hostname is not used for traffic to your MCP servers, and clients continue to call the gateway on the `/mcp` path from Step 4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The timeout policy must be configured in an {{< reuse "agw-docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} resource that targets the `ext-mcp` Service. A backend policy that targets a `Service` attaches only after the Service becomes part of the proxy data plane configuration, which happens when a route references it. The HTTPRoute in the following example exists only to bring the `ext-mcp` Service into the data plane configuration so that the timeout policy attaches. The `ext-mcp.internal` hostname is a placeholder for the ExtMCP server. The hostname is not used for traffic to your MCP servers, and clients continue to call the gateway on the `/mcp` path from Step 4.
```
